Initial Draft for ADT (#51)
Codecademy/ugc: content/dharma/abstract-data-structures.md

> ---

Reviewer: @Goku-kun Make sure that the parent folder name for this article is the same as your Codecademy username in all lowercase (emphasis mine):

~content/_**dharma**_/abstract-data-structures~ -> content/_**goku-kun**_/abstract-data-structures

Also, the name of the markdown file (currently `abstract-data-structures.md`) must be the same as the `Title` (lowercase and delimited with dashes if needed), which is different.

~`abstract-data-structures.md`~ -> `introduction-to-adts-in-javascript.md`

Title: "Introduction to ADTs in JavaScript"
Description: "An introduction to Abstract Data Types"
DatePublished: "2022-04-25"
Categories:
  - "code-foundations"
  - "computer-science"
Tags:
  - "Data Structures"
  - "Classes"
  - "OOP"
CatalogContent:

>   - "paths/computer-science"
>   - "introduction-to-javascript"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - "introduction-to-javascript"
  - "paths/computer-science"
```

If any `"paths/..."` slugs are listed here, they should follow any free "Learn [This]" slugs like `"introduction-to-javascript"`.

---

> ![Introduction to Abstract Data Type](./adt.png)

Reviewer 2: Another note RE: images. The images should take into account the possibility of dark and light themes. When using backgrounds that could disappear against a dark background but not a light one, it's probably best to establish a border around the graphic to insure a consistent look. Also make sure graphics with a transparent background are legible against both light and dark backgrounds, if not, give them a solid background and a border so they're legible with both themes.

> ![Introduction to Abstract Data Type](./adt.png)

Author: Okay. I'll add backgrounds borders to these images so that the images look visible and consistent across different color backgrounds.

> ![Introduction to Abstract Data Type](./adt.png)

Reviewer: One other thing about images @Goku-kun. The link should have the following format:

`https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Codecademy/ugc/main/content/username/filename.ext`

So here, for example, the link should look like this:

`https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Codecademy/ugc/main/content/goku-kun/adt.png`

In contrast to the data structures which are specific and detailed implementations that deal with how the data structure does its job, abstract data type focuses on _what it does_ and not how it does its job. In short, the ADT defines what that particular data construct must do and the data structure is the concrete implementation of that construct.

> An analogy to explain abstract data type in terms of web development would be CRUD APIs. The user of any CRUD API has to simply know what request method(GET, POST, etc.) should they send and if they followed the rules of the API, the API server would send data back. The user didn't have to worry about the internal workings of the API server. The user simply had to know the rules of interactions and behavior of CRUD API. In this case, the CRUD API is functioning as an abstract data type _from the perspective of the user_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An analogy to explain abstract data types in terms of web development would be CRUD APIs. The user of any CRUD API has to simply know what request method (GET, POST, etc.) should they send and if they followed the rules of the API, the API server would send data back. The user didn't have to worry about the internal workings of the API server. The user simply had to know the rules of interactions and behavior of a CRUD API. In this case, the CRUD API is functioning as an abstract data type _from the perspective of the user_.
```

Reviewer 2: You may also want to spell out CRUD initially.

Author: Ah. I'll add that as well.

Reviewer: With regards to the first sentence in this line, I would change "abstract data types" to "ADTs". Going back to @SSwiniarski's [earlier](https://github.com/Codecademy/ugc/pull/51/files#r862357897) and [subsequent](https://github.com/Codecademy/ugc/pull/51/files#r862359520) suggestions, this abbreviation should be introduced at the first reference to "Abstract Data Type(s)" and exclusively used afterwards.

> There are no specific rules which force the implementation of particular methods and operations in a particular ADT. This is decided based on the requirements in a use-case scenario and therefore, ultimately a purely design decision.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are no specific rules which force the implementation of particular methods and operations in a particular ADT. This is decided based on the requirements in a use-case scenario and therefore, ultimately purely a design decision.
```

> ## Why use ADTs?

Reviewer 2: Up to now the usage of ADT or abstract data type has been inconsistent. You should probably stick to the ADT acronym once it's introduced.

Author: I'll introduce the "Abstract Data Type" as ADT in the first line and all the succeeding mentions will only mention ADT from that point.

There are 3 general advantages of using ADTs, listed as follows:

### Encapsulation

> ADT will provide certain methods and properties and knowledge of these methods and properties is all the user will need to successfully operate with the ADT

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An ADT will provide certain methods and properties and knowledge of these methods and properties is all the user will need to successfully operate with the ADT.
```

### Compartmentalization

The code that is using the ADT will not have to be changed even if the internal workings of the ADT have been changed. The change in the ADT is isolated and compartmentalized.

### Adaptability

> Real world programs continue to evolve with ever changing requirements or new constraints. Differently implemented ADTs, with all the same properties and methods, can thus be used interchangebly. For example, if there was linked list created using lists/arrays that contained name of the patients in a hospital but later they decide to include all the information about the patient in the linked list, then a linked list implemented using class based nodes with all the necessary fields would serve as a much better replacement as compared to the linked list that is simply using arrays/lists.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Real world programs continue to evolve with ever changing requirements or new constraints. Differently implemented ADTs, with all the same properties and methods, can thus be used interchangeably. For example, if there was linked list created using lists/arrays that contained name of the patients in a hospital but later it's decided to include all the information about the patient in the linked list, then a linked list implemented using class based nodes with all the necessary fields would serve as a much better replacement as compared to the linked list that is simply using arrays/lists.
```

Reviewer 2: Also this paragraph seems to be missing a final sentence reiterating that the updated implementation can still be used by the legacy code designed around the ADT.

> ## General Operations supported by ADTs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## General operations supported by ADTs
```

Article headers should following a "Sentence case syntax"

ADTs support the follow operations:

> 1. **Traversing**: Traversing allows each data in the ADT to be accessed once for processing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. **Traversing**: Traversing allows each element in the ADT to be accessed once for processing
```

Reviewer: I would also suggest changing this list into an unordered list; these operation do have to be done in a certain order, do they?

Another suggestion would be to DRY these list items out such that it isn't beginning with a repeated word. Also, if list items are written out as complete sentences then they should end with punctuation, such as period `.`.

Current edit:

```
1. **Traversing**: Traversing allows each element in the ADT to be accessed once for processing
```

Suggested edit for this and remaining list items:

```suggestion
1. **Traversing**, which allows each element in the ADT to be accessed once for processing.
```

> 2. **Searching**: Searching allows the user to look for specific data in the ADT

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. **Searching**: Searching allows the user to look for a specific element in the ADT
```

> 3. **Inserting**: Inserting allows the user to insert data at a particular index/space in the ADT

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. **Inserting**: Inserting allows the user to insert an element at a particular index/space in the ADT
```

> 4. **Deleting**: Deleting allows the user to either delete a particular piece of data or delete data at a particular location

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. **Deleting**: Deleting allows the user to either delete a particular element or delete an element at a particular location
```

> 5. **Sorting**: Sorting operation would allow the data to be ordered in ascending or descending order, depending on the preference.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. **Sorting**: Sorting operation would allow the elements to be ordered in ascending or descending order, depending on the preference.
```

## How ADTs coexist with other programs

Each ADT supports specific operations which can be leveraged in a particular situation. Some ADTs can provide better speeds at looking up data while other can save space. But, these ADTs work in conjunction with other programs to track, store, retrieve and manipulate the data. The user is the one that decides which particular ADT would best serve their requirements.

![Abstract Data Type Usage](./abstract-data-type-usage.png)

> ## Linked-list as an ADT

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Linked-lists as an ADT
```

> Linked-lists is made up of a sequence of elements(called nodes, refer the left note below), which may or may not be stored sequentially in memory. For a simple linked-list, each node has the ability to store some data and the link to the next node in the linked-list. Every linked-list begins at the head node which is then linked to the next node.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Linked-lists are made up of a sequence of elements (called nodes, refer the left note below), which may or may not be stored sequentially in memory. For a simple linked-list, each node has the ability to store some data and the link to the next node in the linked-list. Every linked-list begins at the head node which is then linked to the next node.
```

![node and linked list](./node-linked-list.png)

> Linked-list ADT would support the following operations:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Linked-list ADTs would support the following operations:
```

```js
// general operations
getHead(); // returns back head node
getSize(); // return the current size of the linked-list
isEmpty(); // returns true if the linked-list is empty

// insert and replace operations
insertBeginning(value); // inserts new value at the beginning of the linked-list
insertEnd(value); // inserts new value at the end of the linked-list
insertAtPosition(value, index); // inserts new value at the given positional index
replaceAtPosition(value, index); // replaces the value at give index with the new value

// delete operations
deleteBeginning(); // removes the first value and returns its value
deleteEnd(); // removes the last value and returns its value
deleteAtPosition(index); // removes node from the given positional index and returns its value

// traverse, sort and search operations
traverse(); // goes through all the elements once in the linked list and prints them
search(value); // searches given value and returns true if the value is found in linked-list
sort(order); // sorts the linked-list in the given order (ascending/descending)
retrieve(index); // returns the value stored at the given index location
```

> ## Stack ADT

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Stack ADTs
```

> A **Stack** is a linear data structure, in which data is entered and removed from _only a single point_. This point is called the **top** of the stack. It follows the last-in, first-out (colloquially abbreviated as LIFO) format for storing and discarding data. This means that the last element added to the top of the stack is the first element that will be removed from the stack. There is no other way to access other elements in the stack but the element that is at the top of the stack.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A **Stack** is a linear data structure, in which data is entered and removed from _only a single point_. This point is called the **top** of the stack. It follows the last-in, first-out (abbreviated as LIFO) format for storing and discarding data. This means that the last element added to the top of the stack is the first element that will be removed from the stack. There is no other way to access other elements in the stack but the element that is at the top of the stack.
```

![Stack ADT](./stack-adt.png)

> Stack ADT supports the following operations:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A stack ADT supports the following operations:
```

```js
push(value); // inserts a new value at the top of the stack
pop(); // removes the element stored at the top of the stack and returns it
peek(); // returns the top element without removing it from the stack
```

> ## Queue ADT

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Queue ADTs
```

> A **Queue** is a linear data structure, in which data is inserted from one end and removed from the other end. The place where the data is inserted is called the **rear** end of the queue and the place from which the data is removed is called the **front** of the queue. It follows the first-in, first-out (abbreviated as FIFO) configuration for storing and removing data. This means that the data that entered first, also leaves first out of the queue. There is no other way to access other elements in the queue but the front of the queue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Queues** are linear data structures in which data is inserted from one end and removed from the other end. The place where the data is inserted in the queue is called the **enqueue**, or rear. Data can then be removed from the **dequeue**, or front, of the queue. The first-in, first-out (FIFO) configuration is used for storing and removing data in queues. This means that the data that was first to enter the queue is also the first to leave.
```

Author: I think we should phrase this statement as:

```
**Queues** are linear data structures, in which data is inserted from one end and removed from the other end. The place where the data is inserted in the queue is called the **rear** end of the queue and this insertion operation is called **enqueue**. Data can be removed from the **front** of the queue and this deletion operation is called **dequeue**. It follows the first-in, first-out (abbreviated as FIFO) configuration for storing and removing data. This means that the data that was first to enter the queue is also first to leave the queue.

```

Reviewer: 👍🏻

![Queue ADT](./queue-adt.png)

Queue ADT supports the following operations:

```js
enqueue(value); // inserts a new value in the queue
dequeue(); // removes the element at the front of the queue and returns it

> ```

Reviewer 2: It is a good practice to have a concluding section that does a high level recap of what was gone over in the article.

Author: I'll add the concluding section with a high level review of the data types discussed above.
